[Music]
welcome to topcast and episode
2 in the fabric of reality series during
which the
preparation thereof i figured out we're
going to need at least
one more episode so this is going to be
a three-part series on chapter one
which is the theory of everything from
the fabric of reality and today we're
absolutely going to see
all the ways in which the beginning of
infinity
appears there in seed-like form
in the fabric of reality so too parts of
the science of canon can't parts of
constructive theory
are absolutely here as well so i'm part
way through
after part one i only got through a few
pages i'm only part way through
the chapter right now and i'm on page
seven for anyone who's reading along
right down the bottom of page seven
where david writes quote
to say that prediction is the purpose of
a scientific theory
is to confuse means with ends it is like
saying that the purpose of a spaceship
is to burn fuel in fact burning fuel is
only one of many things a spaceship has
to do to accomplish its real purpose
which is to transport its payload from
one point in space to another
passing experimental tests is only one
of many things
a theory has to do to achieve the real
purpose of science
which is to explain the world as i have
said
explanations are inevitably framed
partly in terms of things we do not
observe directly
atoms and forces the interiors of stars
and the rotation of galaxies
the past and the future the laws of
nature the deeper an explanation is
the more remote from immediate
experience are the entities
to which it must refer but these
entities are not fictional
on the contrary they are part of the
very fabric of reality
pausing there just reflecting on this
today i've made a couple of other
podcasts as well and they'll be coming
out
coincident with this within sort of a
week or so it takes that long to edit
these things
one is about quasars and so i'm sure you
can find that in the youtube feed or in
the podcast feed somewhere or other
it's just called quasars it's me talking
about quasars the history of their
discovery
and the physics behind what causes them
to do what they do
and almost everything of interest there
is unobserved almost everything of
interest about what
causes a quasar to do what a quasar does
much less to speak of the history of
quasar
um discovery is unobserved unobserved
and also released with this episode is a
series
on the science of canon can't by kiara
maletto and again
i was talking about this very same issue
it just comes up
again and again that the main
content of an explanation is the unseen
parts of it and david just listed a few
things there
the things that we don't observe
directly atoms and forces the interiors
of stars and the rotations of galaxies
the past and the future the laws of
nature
in fact not only not observe directly
not observe
at all okay in the case of the core of
stars
i was saying in another episode that
there's no possible way
that we know of it appears to be
impossible to observe
the core of a star directly or at all
you can't send a probe there there's no
way in which you could get
to the center of the star and it's
optically opaque anyway so you can't get
radiation through there i suppose in
some distant future
theoretically some sort of hugely
sensitive gravity meter
or some other kind of device beyond
which
we have no conception right now might be
able to image the center of a star but
at the moment
no chance no chance whatever's going on
there is going on at 15 million
kelvin nothing can survive 15 million
kelvin and very little information
survives at 15 million kelvin and the
only
way we have to figure out what's going
on there is to observe the photons that
arrive at
earth and we can see some of the surface
of the sun
and infer therefore what the explanation
that produces the effects that we do
observe must be
okay what the causes of the effects that
we do observe
must be namely stellar fusion
fusion in the core of the sun the the
the combining of hydrogen nuclei
to form helium another process producing
heat and light and
thinking of history i mean we observe
we observe documents don't we we observe
the newspaper clippings and these days
of course video records
but we don't observe right now as a
matter of our experience our immediate
experience here and now
we don't observe the past and so when i
talked about
the history of quasars in that episode i
don't observe
those particular physicists that were
involved
in creating the knowledge about quasars
discovering the problem to begin with
and then
slowly resolving the problem with this
theory of
quasars all i've got access to is
documents and articles
online and textbooks and so on but
that's hardly observing the past
directly it's not observing the past at
all it's observing documents
interpreting them and then constructing
an explanation a historical explanation
about how it is that this theory
arose all in the first place interested
interested in that just look for the the
quasars episode
okay so i'm skipping a bit there because
david is
distinguishing between the importance of
explanations and how you know in physics
we do have the capacity to make
certain kinds of predictions but that is
hardly the main point
of a scientific theory but this is a
point i've belabored
often in the various podcasts i've made
so i won't do it again
here and now more than i've already done
so so i'm skipping to the part where
david says quote
most people would say and this is in
effect what was being said to me on the
occasion i recalled from my childhood
that it has not only recorded facts
which have been increasing at an
overwhelming rate
but also the number and complexity of
theories through which we understand the
world
consequently they say whether or not it
was ever possible for one person to
understand everything that was
understood
at the time it is certainly not possible
now and it is becoming less and less
possible as our knowledge grows
it might seem that every time a new
explanation or technique is discovered
that is relevant to a given subject
another theory must be added to the list
that anyone wishing to understand that
subject must learn
and that when the number of such
theories in any one subject becomes too
great
specializations develop physics for
example
has split into the sciences of
astrophysics thermodynamics particle
physics quantum field theory and many
others
each of these is based on a theoretical
framework at least as rich as the whole
of physics was a hundred years ago
and many are already fragmenting into
sub-specializations
the more we discover it seems the
further and more
irrevocably we are propelled into the
age of the specialist
and the more remote is that hypothetical
ancient time when a single person
standing might have encompassed all that
was understood
confronted with this vast and rapidly
growing menu of the collected theories
of the human race
one may be forgiven for doubting that an
individual could so much as taste every
dish in a lifetime
let alone as might once have been
possible appreciate all known recipes
yet explanation is a strange sort of
food a larger portion is not necessarily
harder to swallow
a theory may be superseded by a new
theory which explains more
and is more accurate but is also easier
to understand
in which case the old theory becomes
redundant and we gain more understanding
while needing to learn less than before
this is what happened when nicolas
copernicus's theory of the earth
traveling around the sun
superseded the complex ptolemaic system
which had placed the earth at the center
of the universe
or a new theory may be a simplification
of an existing one
such as when the arabic decimal notation
for numbers superseded roman numerals
the theory here is an implicit one each
notation renders certain operations
statements and thoughts about numbers
simpler than others and hence it
embodies a theory
about which relationships between
numbers are useful
or interesting or a theory may be a
unification of two old ones
giving us more understanding than using
the old ones side by side
as happened when michael faraday and
james clark maxwell
unified the theories of electricity and
magnetism into a single theory of
electromagnetism
more indirectly better explanations in
any subject
tend to improve the techniques concepts
and language
with which we are trying to understand
other subjects and so our knowledge as a
whole
while increasing can become structurally
more amenable to being
understood pausing there and just
skipping a very substantial piece
on the roman numeral system and its
redundancy in the light
of a better idea namely arabic numerals
and then we get into a section which
really
prefaces so much that is in the
beginning of infinity
and motivates the underlying world view
of david deutsch and is kind of an
improvement upon the work of kyle popper
a sharpening up
of what karl popper said
here it is quote david says
it is hard to give a precise definition
of explanation
or understanding roughly speaking they
are about
why rather than what about the inner
workings of things
about how things really are not just how
they appear to be
about what must be so rather than what
merely appears to be so
about laws of nature rather than rules
of thumb just pausing there
it's also hard and this i get straight
from david deutsch
and i don't know if it's mentioned here
in the fabric of reality i don't recall
it being mentioned in the fabric of
reality
but one reason why we cannot give a
precise definition of what an
explanation is
and why we cannot give a precise
definition of
what hard to vary means okay david
deutsch has
given us the idea that what we're
seeking
in knowledge creation are good
explanations and by good he means hard
to vary
and people say oh what's hard to vary
and he tries to give
an explanation of what hard to vary is
namely that all the parts of the
explanation
survey purpose such that none of them
are arbitrary
and if you were to try and change any
one of them
you would break the explanation okay
that's my understanding of how to vary
more
more or less and then people object and
they want to say well but that's not
definitive uh you know there are there
are options here that there's a certain
looseness there's a certain
hazy character to these definitions and
one wants to say
in the papillion view absolutely there
is absolutely there is
we're not going to get hung up on
definitions we're not witkinstinian okay
ludwig wittgenstein
infected philosophy with the notion that
we should argue about words and
terminology we need to sharpen up
our understanding of words and
terminology and if we don't then we're
not doing proper philosophy
this is wrong this is false what we're
trying to do in philosophy
on karl popper's view on the papyrian
view
and now us who inherit the popeyrian
is to solve problems problems in
philosophy namely
things like what are we after when we're
trying to create explanation
trying to create knowledge we're after
explanations we're after trying to
explain the world
what's an explanation well you know it's
an account of why rather than what it's
an account of
what is really out there how things um
not just how things appear to be but
what must be so
this kind of thing oh but that's not a
strict definition no
and one reason why an important reason
why we can't sharpen this up
is because we have to allow for new
modes of explanation we have to allow
our definition
so to speak our understanding of
explanation to be sufficiently elastic
to allow for new kinds of explanation to
be invented in the future
they didn't used to be a mode of
explanation called
the darwinian understanding of evolution
by natural selection
evolution by natural selection this way
in which
genes can be selected for or selected
against the selfish gene id there's a
new mode of explanation nothing like
that existed before
but if you tried to say that
explanations could only consist
of let's say as i've been talking about
in physics recently
and chiara maletto's book that if
the only explanation that's permitted is
an explanation in terms of
dynamical laws and initial conditions
then that would also rule out something
like
evolution by natural selection which is
not of that kind it's not an
explanation of that kind much less
all of constructor theory we need to
allow for explanations that
don't necessarily comport with our
conception of explanations
right now okay so the best that we can
do is to give
broad brush strokes about what
explanations are
we know it when we see it to a large
extent an explanation is
an account of what exists out there how
it works
why it works and all that kind of stuff
but but we can't be
too sharp about it in fact this is true
i should just say
as a by-the-by for any area of science
or
philosophical interests we're not after
definitions if you're after definitions
pick up a dictionary read the dictionary
definition and if you think that gives
you a deep understanding of the
phenomena you're interested in
good luck but the rest of us who are
interested in actually
uh comprehending the world in which we
find ourselves
using the best explanations that have
thus far been found
we want more than just definitions and
so
for example when people get caught up on
let's say well
tell me what an electron really is well
we can give you
and the best understanding we have right
now but a definition of an electron like
learning it like supposedly
you know a good student in high school
does or something or other you write
down your glossary at the back of your
science book and you write down the
definitions of words so that you can
regurgitate them
during a test sounds abhorrent and in
fact it's anti-purporian of course like
i'm saying
we want an understanding what's our best
understanding of electrons right now
well they're particles and they they
exist in multiple universes
they're excitations of the quantum field
to some extent
there's these ways of conceptualizing
what an electron is to give us
an image both mathematical and visual of
what these
objects called electrons happen to be
that solves our problem that solves our
problem of what
our understanding of electrons is what
they are what these objects are
doesn't mean it's a final definitive
uh forever definition of an electron no
absolutely not and there can be no such
definition
so forget definitions should also say
beyond
things like that something like a more
controversial
concept like free will people get caught
up
in defining what free will is and this
is a perfect
perfect way for it to go off the rails
and so recently when people
talk about free will they'll say well
what you have defined as free will isn't
free will and there's no point in trying
to talk about something
that isn't what everyone else regards as
god's free will as being
and i just think to myself well just
because everyone else defines free will
in this particular way just because the
dictionary does
has no bearing whatsoever on the true
nature of free will
in the same way the overwhelming
majority of people if asked to define
what a species is will get it wrong
that has absolutely no bearing
whatsoever on our best understanding of
what a species is
or what an electron is most people would
get it wrong okay
would be would deviate from our best
understanding of that and when we
encounter a problem
with a concept like let's say free will
which is useful
because it's useful in trying to
understand what a person is
that a person can generate uh
explanations can create explanations
those explanations allow for a greater
repertoire of choices to exist
choices that didn't exist before namely
if you create an explanation like
general relativity
it gives you a choice at some point in
the future which you could never have
possibly had before it
namely the existence of a really precise
gps system so that choice now exists
that choice to build or not to build
that thing you can build it or not build
it that's free will it's
very hard to avoid this word but if
people insist on saying well free will
is that supernatural thing that you
can't possibly have in a deterministic
universe and that's that
or something similar to that then of
course there is no progress to be made
we're fixated on definitions and anyone
can argue
that nothing exists based upon a
definition
so for example you can quite easily say
that atoms don't exist
i can sit back with my arms crossed and
say no i don't believe in atoms why
because the greeks said
that the atoms are indivisible little
spheres i don't believe they exist in
fact science tells us those things don't
exist
what we have instead are particles
called electrons
and protons and that's it and the atoms
don't exist and if i come along and say
but hold on
our understanding of atoms has moved on
it's evolved it is that object
where you've got a nucleus consisting of
the protons and the neutrons orbited by
electrons that's what we understand
atoms to be if you still then insist on
saying no
i'm not calling that an atom the greeks
invented the word atom and that's it
well then there's no possibility for
consensus learning
we're just arguing about words and you
can keep that word atom if you want and
let's call that object something else
for the purpose of making progress let's
call it george i'm happy to call it
george and move on
but that's rather strange isn't it like
insisting that we have to adhere to
certain definitions of words rather than
making progress on scientific and
philosophical concepts
especially where there's open-ended
questions especially in an area like
consciousness creativity and i would say
free will belongs there as well
insisting that these things cannot
possibly obtain to use the philosophical
jargon
in a universe which is deterministic is
again falling into the wittgensteinian
trap
that philosophy is about linguistics and
words and that we can define out of
existence
certain things this is not to say it's
not to say that there are certain other
things
that we want to suggest don't exist that
our best understanding of them
suggests they don't exist for example
ghosts
okay there's a way in which we can talk
about
ghosts that supernatural thing by our
understanding of science
there's no reason there's no explanation
that requires
ghosts to exist or unicorns to exist
or gandolf the grey the wizard to really
exist in physical reality
no explanation is required for those
things and this is where something
may exist or may not exist but something
like free will is where we can have a
reasonable debate about things
but insisting on a particular definition
to rule out something to rule out free
will in the same way that we rule out
rule out gandalf the grey or fairies or
something else like that is simply to
ignore the fact that
we don't understand how it is
that people different to all other
creatures in the universe all other
systems in the universe create knowledge
and then make choices
in a way that is utterly different to
any other
species that exists in the universe that
we know of any other system that exists
in the universe that we know of
we create knowledge it's mysterious and
part of that mystery
is free will and trying to define it out
of existence
i don't buy it and i don't think it's
useful either yet again another tirade
on free will i should ban myself from
talking about that again for a while
i've done episode after episode
on it but it keeps coming up and so i
can't fully blame myself
reacting against people who keep on
saying that they have the final once and
for all
explanation of free will i think i have
an explanation of free will and i think
it's the once and for all one
i think it's just better than anything
that i've heard so far and certainly
better than
ones that say well by definition free
will can't exist in
a deterministic universe and again we'll
have something more to say about that
that idea
in the science of cannon carp because
this whole idea of deterministic
universe
based upon deterministic physical laws
laws of motion with initial conditions
well constructive theory is going to
have something to say about that as well
but that's a whole other story we're
going to come here in the fabric of
reality too
part of the mystery about that
explanations
as david says quote going back to the
book they are also about
coherence elegance and simplicity as
opposed to arbitrariness and complexity
though none of those things is easy to
define either
but in any case understanding is one of
the higher functions of the human mind
and brain
and a unique one many other physical
systems such as
animals brains computers and other
machines
can assimilate facts and act upon them
but at present we know of nothing that
is capable of understanding an
explanation
or of wanting one in the first place
other than a human mind
every discovery of a new explanation and
every act of grasping an explanation
depends on the uniquely human faculty of
creative thought
pausing there my reflection well right
there we
see the seed of the explanation of
what a person is and in the beginning of
infinity we sharpen this up to be
a person is a universal
explanation creator a universal
explainer
and that all comes straight from here
it's it's there's a prelude here to it
you know
only uh human mind
that the human mind is the only thing
that we know of already in physical
reality
capable of understanding an explanation
or grasping an explanation
all of which is equivalent to creating
an explanation in the first place this
uniquely human
faculty of creative thought now we say
uniquely human at the moment
if we have artificial general
intelligence and we know it must be
physically possible then the artificial
general intelligence
will also be part of these creatures
that have this unique ability to create
explanations the only other thing that i
can think of really would be
alien intelligence out there somewhere
or other that could also
be able to create explanations since in
their own mind
the mind of the aliens and that would
make them people
and just skipping a section here again
and going to a part where david writes
quote
it is possible to understand something
without knowing that one understands it
or even without having specifically
heard of it
this may sound paradoxical but of course
the whole point of deep general
explanations
is that they cover unfamiliar situations
as well as familiar ones
if you are a modern mathematician and
counting roman numerals for the first
time you might not instantly realize
that you've already understood them
you would have to learn the facts about
what they are
and then think about those facts in
light of your existing understanding of
mathematics but once you have done that
you'll be able to say in respect yes
there's nothing new in the roman numeral
system
beyond mere facts and that is what it
means to say that roman numerals in
their explanatory role
are fully obsolete similarly when i say
i understand how the curvature of space
and time affects the motion of planets
even other solar systems i may never
have heard of
i'm not claiming that i can call to mind
without further thought the explanation
of every detail of the loops and wobbles
of any planetary orbit
what i mean is that i understand the
theory that contains all those
explanations
and that i could therefore produce any
of them in due course
given some facts about a particular
planet having done so i should be able
to say in retrospect
yes i see nothing in the motion of that
planet other than mere facts which is
not explained by the general theory of
relativity
we understand the fabric of reality only
by understanding theories that explain
it
and since they explain more than we are
immediately aware of we can understand
more than we are immediately aware
that we understand pausing near my
reflection this is in part the concept
of
inexplicit knowledge or at least
implicit knowledge
implicit knowledge so if i have an
understanding to take a simpler case of
newton's law of gravity okay the formula
is f equals g
m one m two over r squared and at least
one formulation of it
then although i might not be able to
call to mind to remember exactly how
neptune for example orbits the sun
using this law i can quite readily
predict how fast neptune will orbit the
sun given a few details about the mass
of the sun and the distance neptune
let's say and so the one law contains
within it
implicitly explanations predictions
and descriptions of the orbits of all
the planets
in the salsa in fact all the orbits of
planets that exist in solar systems yet
to be
discovered so it's that that's the
ascension which
it's implicit and my understanding of
those
things is implicit as well and david's
understanding of these things is
implicitly contained within those things
continuing david writes
i am not saying that when we understand
a theory it necessarily follows that we
understand
everything it can explain with a very
deep theory the recognition that it
explains a given phenomenon
may itself be a significant discovery or
acquiring independent explanation
for example quasars extremely bright
sources of radiation at the center of
some galaxies
were for many years one of the mysteries
of astrophysics
it was once thought that new physics
would be needed to explain them
but now we believe that they are
explained by the general theory of
relativity
and other theories that were already
known before quasars were discovered
we believe that quasars consist of hot
matter in the process of falling into
black holes
collapsed stars whose gravitational
field is so intense that nothing can
escape from them
yet reaching that conclusion has
required years of research both
observational and theoretical
now that we believe we have gained a
measure of understanding of quasars
we do not think that this understanding
is something we already had before
explaining quasars through existing
theories has given us genuinely new
understanding
just as it is hard to define what an
explanation is it is hard to define when
a subsidiary explanation
should count as an independent component
of what is being understood and when it
should be considered as being subsumed
in the deeper theory
it is hard to define but not so hard to
recognize
in practice we know a new explanation
when we are given one the difference has
something to do with creativity
explaining the motion of a particular
planet when one already understands the
general explanation of gravity
is a mechanical task though it may be a
very complex one
but using existing theory to account for
quasars requires creative thought
thus to understand everything that is
understood in astrophysics today
you would have to know the theory of
quasars explicitly but you would not
have to know the orbit of any specific
planet
pausing near my reflection and just
because this is on my mind right now so
what david's saying there is
okay here's the situation with quasars
and the sense in which
they weren't already contained within
existing knowledge of astrophysics
because it was a problem here's in short
what my episode about quasars is all
about and it's just fortuitous that i
happen to have made a thing about
quasars which was a response to
something i said in an episode called
the nexus which is basically about
people but
i talked about quasars and the reason i
talked about quasars is because david
has used at the beginning of infinity
and in his ted talks
to talk about this concept of
self-similarity how our
theories of quasars over time come to
more accurately resemble actual quasars
out there on the other side of the
universe
anyway the history of the discovery of
quasars
is that at first they were found to be
extremely distant
okay long story short they were found to
have high redshifts
so therefore they are typically billions
of light years away billions of light
years away
that was found looking at the spectra of
these things
fine very well however although the
spectra told us that they were a long
way off
receding at a very high velocity other
telescopes and other measurements were
able to reveal what their luminosity was
how bright they were
and they were just too bright they were
too bright for any existing theory of
physics to account for they were small
smaller than you know basically well on
on the order of maybe a little bit
bigger than a solar system but certainly
not as big as a galaxy
and yet thousands of times brighter than
a galaxy many thousands of times
brighter than a typical galaxy
so distant brighter than a galaxy much
smaller than a galaxy
how would this be possible well
it's not possible if you assume that the
quasar
is truly a quasi-stellar radio source a
quasi-somewhat like a star
source of light a star puts out light
from all points on its surface roughly
evenly
it's a big sphere roughly speaking of
plasma of hot gas and it's putting out
radiation equally in all directions now
this is true of objects in space
generally and this is what astronomers
reasonably thought that a quasar should
be it should be a spherical object
putting out
light in all directions equally now if
you make that assumption
then the physics just doesn't work it's
not possible for something that small to
be
that bright it exceeds something called
the eddington limit and violates
laws of physics so they thought they
needed new physics as david says there
they don't and this is why although you
could have a full understanding of
general relativity and get a full
understanding of quantum theory and
nuclear physics and all that sort of
stuff and still not be able to explain
what a quasar is
even though a quasar obeys all those
laws and the reason is well the problem
of how it could be so bright whilst
being
so distant is it's not putting out light
in all directions evenly it's putting
out light
in beams it's putting out light in very
narrow beams and we we can see
just that part of the beam and so it
appears super bright
and that's fine if you notice
and assume that it's not putting out
that energy in all directions but
just a few privileged directions too
typically
and so we're getting a very concentrated
part of that beam
at least part in that see my episode i'm
quite asked for more about exactly
what's going on
sometimes we're in the beam in which
case it's called a blazer
and sometimes we can see the lobes of
gas produced by the beam being
illuminated by the beam and so it's a
sort of a complicated process but
quasars are absolutely fascinating
objects because they are so distant
they allow us to understand what the
universe was like
in the deep dark past in fact the deep
bright past as it turns out
because there are many more of these
things in the early universe and
therefore we see them
at very high redshifts at very distant
parts of the universe
okay skipping a section where david
talks about
other kinds of explanation inexplicit
explanations
uh which people in bygone areas
needed to rely on so they weren't proper
explanations
but rather rules of thumb okay rules of
thumb things that
appear to have worked probably by some
process of
evolution by natural selection you use
this rule of thumb to build a bridge
and it's worked because all previous
attempts to use it have worked and the
ones that didn't work
well the bridge fell down but you don't
know why you don't know the engineering
principles that underlie why this bridge
stayed up and this bridge fell down
but you use certain rules of thumb and
lucky for you those rules of thumb
happen
to be able to be derived from deeper
physical theories but you don't know the
physical theories
you've just guessed the right a bit of
the theory without knowing what it is
if that makes sense that's why it's
inexplicit you haven't been able to put
it into words
been able to explain it in any way as
david says of this
when admiring centuries old structures
people often forget that we see only the
surviving ones
the overwhelming majority of structures
built in medieval and earlier times
have collapsed long ago often soon after
they were built
so you know people get very excited
about the pyramids okay oh wow the
pyramids you know the
the egyptians built these big pile of
rocks they must have had alien help
they're so impressive
putting aside they're not that
impressive they are literally a pile of
rocks
um insofar as there's any architectural
ingenuity there that we can sort of
think is impressive
you know if you give a typical person
with you know even
moderate amount of engineering
understanding
a sufficient amount of human labor
cheaply paid human labor under the
threat of a
tyrant well you can probably get a
pretty impressive pile of rocks going as
well with little chambers inside
but how many pyramids were there that
didn't survive
that fell down don't know okay it's hard
for a pile of rocks to fall down but
collapse in some way or other and needed
to be rebuilt
we don't know there's no records of
those we're impressed by the ones that
survive
so too with bridges so too with
cathedrals and so on
so i'm skipping all of that and david
returns to this concept of
specialization versus generalizing
okay and whether or not this constant
apparent
apparent fragmenting of our knowledge
means that we can't understand
everything
that could be understood david writes
quote i'm not of course
denying that specialization is occurring
in many subjects in which knowledge is
growing
including architecture this is not a
one-way process for specializations
often disappear too
wheels are no longer designed or made by
wheel rights nor plows by plow rights
nor
letters written by scribes it is
nevertheless quite evident that the
deepening unifying tendency i've been
describing
is not the only one at work a continual
broadening is going on at the same time
that is new ideas often do more than
just supersede
simplify or unify existing ones they
also extend human understanding into
areas that were previously
not understood at all or whose very
existence
was not guessed at they may open up new
opportunities new problems new
specializations and even new subjects
and when that happens it may give us at
least temporarily
more to learn in order to understand it
all the science of medicine is perhaps
the most frequently cited case of
increasing specialization
seeming to follow inevitably from
increasing knowledge
as new cures and better treatments for
more diseases are discovered but even in
medicine the opposite unifying tendency
is also present
and is becoming stronger admittedly many
functions of the body are still poorly
understood
and so are the mechanisms of many
diseases consequently
some areas of medical knowledge still
consist mainly of collections of
recorded facts together with the skills
and intuitions of doctors who have
experience of particular diseases and
particular treatments and who pass
on these skills and intuitions from one
generation to the next
much of medicine in other words is still
in the rule of thumb era
and when new rules of thumb are
discovered there is indeed more
incentive for specialization
but as medicine and biochemical research
comes up with deeper explanations of
disease processes
and healthy processes in the body
understanding is also on the increase
more general concepts are replacing more
specific ones as common
underlying molecular mechanisms are
found for dissimilar diseases in
different parts of the body
once a disease can be understood as
fitting into a general framework
the role of the specialist diminishes
instead
physicians coming across an unfamiliar
disease or a rare complication
can rely increasingly on explanatory
theories
they can look up such facts as unknown
but then they may be able to apply
a general theory to work out the
required treatment and expect it to be
effective even if it never has been used
before
thus the issue of whether it is becoming
harder or easier to understand
everything
that is understood depends on the
overall balance between these two
opposing effects of the growth of
knowledge the increasing breadth of our
theories
and their increasing depth brit makes it
harder
depth makes it easier one thesis of this
book is that slowly but surely
depth is winning in other words the
proposition that i refuse to believe as
a child is indeed false and practically
the opposite is true
we are not heading away from a state in
which everyone could understand
everything that is understood
but towards it it is not that we shall
soon understand everything
that is a completely different issue i
do not believe that we are now
nor ever shall be close to understanding
everything there is
what i am discussing is the possibility
of understanding
everything that is understood that
depends more on the structure of our
knowledge than on its content
but of course the structure of our
knowledge whether it is expressible in
theories that fit together as a
comprehensible whole
does depend on what the fabric of
reality as a whole is like
if knowledge is to continue its
open-ended growth and if we
are nevertheless heading towards a state
in which one person could understand
everything that is understood
then the depth of our theories must
continue to grow fast enough to make
this possible
this can happen only if the fabric of
reality itself is highly unified
so that more and more of it can become
understood as our knowledge grows
if that happens then eventually our
theories will become so general
deep and integrated with one another
that they will effectively become a
single theory of a unified fabric of
reality
this theory will still not explain every
aspect of reality
that is unattainable but it will
encompass all known explanations and it
will apply to the whole fabric of
reality
insofar as it is understood whereas all
previous theories related to particular
subjects
this will be a theory of all subjects a
theory of
everything pausing there my reflection
let's just notice that david deutsch
lives this philosophy not only is this
notion expressed in the beginning of
finding but david deutsch's life
has in some sense been an outworking of
this and if only the rest of us could
contribute to this in some way shape or
form
because as he says there
once we have these deeper theories then
it enables us to solve
problems in far more disparate areas
but in terms of david's life
academic life let's consider what's
happened
uh my version interest he was interested
in physics quantum physics
and theory of computation and he was the
first one to properly
unite the theory of quantum physics with
computation computation
prior to which was a part of pure
mathematics
invented by alan turing let's say that's
one history of it
alan turing invents the theory of
computation
it's just a mathematical thing he's
trying to solve problems in
mathematics not until later they build
physical computers
but even then people still think the
theory of computation is just a part of
mathematics david deutsch then applies
quantum physics to the mathematical
theory of computation
recognizing that computers are made out
of matter so he unifies
brings together the theory of
computation a theory of quantum physics
so we now have a
theory of quantum computation
that's the first thing next constructor
theory
constructor theory is a deeper
generalization of
the theory of quantum computation and so
now
it appears as though not all the work
has been done yet but it appears as
though
this constructor theory being
a deeper version of quantum computation
about what is possible and impossible
might be able to provide a
physics of knowledge a physics of
epistemology unifying
epistemology and physics how could this
be possible at all well because it's got
to be
possible to know some things and
impossible to know other things
and if constructor theory is a
fundamental theory of physics
and in fact what knowledge creation is
about is about trying to
construct knowledge about what is
possible to know about
and figuring out what it's not possible
to know about and so we can forget about
those useless uninteresting things
then we have a physics of knowledge as
well and so now we've brought
part of philosophy into this worldview
so david deutch is doing this he is
unifying
our various deep theories of
reality in fact the fabric of reality is
being united specifically
by him to a large extent
kiara has done some work on biology
as well and so it could be within his
lifetime
we hope that this fabric of reality
might actually end up being a single
theory of
biology physics and computation already
united really they
they deserve to be just considered as
one theory and
the theory of epistemology as well which
might very well be just subsumed
by constructor theory physics david then
goes on to say
quote it will not of course be the last
such theory but only the first
in science we take it for granted that
even our best theories are bound to be
imperfect and problematic in some ways
and we expect them to be superseded in
due course by deeper
more accurate theories such progress is
not brought to a halt when we discover a
universal theory
for example newton gave us the first
universal theory of gravity
and a unification of among other things
celestial and terrestrial mechanics
but his theories have been superseded by
einstein's general theory of relativity
which additionally incorporates geometry
formerly regarded as a branch of
mathematics into physics and in doing so
provides far deeper explanations as well
as being more accurate
the first fully universal theory which i
shall call the theory of everything
will like all our theories before and
after it be neither perfectly true
nor infinitely deep and so will
eventually be superseded
but it will not be superseded through
unifications with theories about other
subjects
for it will already be a theory of all
pausing there and skipping a substantial
part here again
and moving on david writes quote
i must stress immediately that i am not
referring merely to the
theory of everything which some particle
physicists hope they will soon discover
their theory of everything would be a
unified theory of all the basic forces
known to physics
namely gravity not a force
electromagnetism and nuclear forces
it would also describe all the types of
subatomic particles that exist
their masses spins electric charges and
other properties and how they interact
given a sufficiently precise description
of the initial state of any isolated
physical system
it would in principle predict the future
behavior of the system
where the exact behavior of a system was
intrinsically unpredictable
it would describe all possible
behaviours and predict their
probabilities
in practice the initial states of
interesting systems often cannot be
ascertained very accurately and in any
case the calculation of the predictions
will be too complicated to be carried
out in all but the simplest cases
nevertheless such a unified theory of
particles and forces
together with a specification of the
initial state of the universe at the big
bang the violent explosion with which
the universe began
would in principle contain all the
information necessary to predict
everything that can be predicted
but prediction is not explanation
the hoped-for theory of everything even
if combined with an
with a theory of the initial state will
at best provide only a tiny
facet of the real theory of everything
it may predict everything in principle
but it cannot be expected to explain
much more than the existing theories do
except for a few phenomena
that are dominated by the nuances of
subatomic particle interactions
such as collisions inside particle
accelerators and the exotic history of
particle transmutations in the big bang
what motivates the term theory of
everything for such a narrow albeit
fascinating piece of knowledge
it is i think another mistaken view of
the nature of science held
disapprovingly by many critics of
science and alas
approvingly by many scientists namely
that science is essentially reductionist
that is to say
science allegedly explains things
reductively by analyzing them into
components
for example the resistance of a wall
being penetrated or knocked down is
explained by regarding the wall as a
vast aggregation of interaction
molecules
the properties of these molecules are
themselves explained in terms of their
constituent atoms
and the interactions of these atoms with
one another and so on down to the
smallest particles
and the most basic forces reductionists
think that all scientific explanations
and perhaps
all sufficiently deep explanations of
any kind take that form the reductionist
conception
leads naturally to a classification of
subjects and theories in a hierarchy
according to how close they are to the
lowest level predictive theories that
are known
in this hierarchy logic and mathematics
form the immovable bedrock on which the
edifice of science is built
the foundation stone would be a
reductive theory of everything
a universal theory of particles forces
space and time together with some theory
of what the initial state of the
universe was the rest of physics forms
the first few stories
astrophysics and chemistry are at a
higher level geology even higher and so
on
the edifice branches into many towers of
increasingly high level subjects like
biochemistry
biology and genetics perched at the
tottering stratospheric tops or subjects
like
the theory of evolution economics
psychology and computer science which in
this picture
are almost inconceivably derivative
pausing there just my reflection on this
yes this is just the common way that
people talk about our knowledge and
david's going to come to the idea that
you know even more than that you have
this
conception that at the base and the most
important immovable
thing is mathematics or logic
but above that slightly you have science
all the sciences
you know that because they're based on
evidence whereas mathematics is
absolutely certain and then
well science isn't quite certain but you
know it's empirically
testable or provable if you like and
then above that you've got
philosophy which is me a matter of
opinion you know this misconception
arises out of the same
kind of ideas it's a denial of the
reality of emergence
now i'm skipping a little bit more where
david talks about
the this reductionist theory of
everything and
i'm just going to read a part which
apparently you know because um
my kindle tells me when people have
highlighted certain passages
and this particular passage has been
highlighted 100 times
and the the the couple of sentences
before the highlighted passage
reads like this for higher level
sciences
the reductionist program is a matter of
principle only
no one expects actually to deduce the
many principles of biology psychology or
politics from those of physics
next part has been highlighted 100 times
the reason why higher level subjects can
be studied at all
is that under special circumstances the
stupendously complex behavior
of vast numbers of particles resolves
itself
into a measure of simplicity and
comprehensibility this is called
emergence high level simplicity emerges
from low level complexity high level
phenomena
about which there are comprehensible
facts that are not simply deducible
from lower level theories are called
emergent phenomena
okay just pausing there my reflection
yes and so almost everything
of interest outside of theoretical
physics is of this kind
it's emergent phenomena it comes out of
the lower level theories but it's not
deducible from them
okay and so that's why i regard lots of
the stuff
that is mysterious about human beings
our ability to create knowledge and so
on
as emergent and real and needs to be
understood in its own terms at that
level
not at the level of physics or any other
level like the operation of neurons in a
brain
it's the wrong level of analysis i'm
skipping a whole
part again david goes into a critique of
the opposite of reductionism which is
holism the idea that we shouldn't be
looking for
explanations at the lowest level but
rather at the highest level and in both
cases these are just
misconceptions that we should privilege
any particular
level of explanation all the
explanations are needed we should want
to understand
everything at every level of emergence
david mentions that a reductionist
thinks that science is about analyzing
things into components
instrumentalists thinks it is about
predicting things to either of them
sciences at the higher level are just
for convenience they don't
correspond to anything real and this is
all a
misconception that we are quite familiar
with
now i can't let this go i cannot let
this chapter go
but it is where i'll i'll finish it
without reading
and giving jew respect to
a story that has had a great impact on
me
and a greater impact on this podcast as
well
and that is of course the winston
churchill
copper atom argument and so
i am going to read it i don't know if
david knew when he
wrote this that it would be referred to
so frequently
thereafter um not just by me by me a
fair bit but
but by a lot of people who try to
explain the
importance of emergent explanations and
how
reductionism has just a poverty of
content when applied in certain contexts
that you can't use reductionism in
anything outside of theoretical physics
and in fact it's absurd to even try
how absurd let's see david writes
quote for example consider one
particular copper atom
at the tip of the nose of the statue of
sir winston churchill
that stands in parliament square in
london let me try to explain
why that copper atom is there it is
because
churchill served as prime minister in
the house of commons nearby
and because his ideas and leadership
contributed to the allied victory in the
second
world war and because it is customary to
honor such people
by putting up statues of them and
because bronze a traditional material
for such statues
contains copper and so on thus we
explain a low
level physical observation the presence
of a copper atom at a particular
location
through extremely high level theories
about emergent phenomena
such as ideas leadership war and
tradition there is no reason why there
should exist
even in principle any lower level
explanation
of the presence of that copper atom than
the one i have just given
presumably a reductive theory of
everything would in principle make a low
level prediction
of the probability that such a statue
will exist
given the condition of say the solar
system at some earlier stage
it would also in principle describe how
the statue
probably got there but such descriptions
and predictions
wildly and feasible of course would
explain
nothing they would merely describe the
trajectory
that each copper atom followed from the
copper mine
through the smelter and the sculptor
studio and so on
they could also state how those
trajectories were influenced by forces
exerted
by surrounding atoms such as those
comprising the miners and sculptors
bodies
and so predict the existence and shape
of the statue in fact such a prediction
would have to refer to atoms all over
the planet
engage in the complex motion we call the
second world war
among other things but even if you had
the superhuman capacity to follow such
lengthy predictions of the copper atoms
being there
you would still not be able to say oh
yes now i understand why it's there
you would merely know that its arrival
there in that way was
inevitable or likely or whatever given
all the atoms initial configurations and
the laws of physics
if you wanted to understand why you
would still have no option
but to take a further step you would
have to inquire into what it was about
the configuration of atoms
and those trajectories that gave them
the propensity to deposit a copper atom
at this location
pursuing this inquiry would be a
creative task as discovering new
explanations always
is you would have to discover that
certain atomic configurations
support emergent phenomena such as
leadership and war which are related to
one another
by higher level explanatory theories
only when you knew those theories could
you fully understand
why that copper atom is where it is
well there we go and that's where i'll
end it today uh that is uh
that is a little story a parable the
parable of the copper atom
that i must have referred to gosh
more than dozens it's got to be hundreds
of times by now
in attempting to just
explain why physics isn't the only game
in town
not only that this idea of well
there's no choice in the matter the
universe is just the unfolding of
atoms moving in the void under
deterministic laws and that that somehow
is an explanation of things it's not
it shows you the value of
all other subjects including physics
including history for example something
that
some scientists traditionally over the
years have
kind of dismissed as not so important
but
physics and science broadly cannot
possibly do everything now of course i
love science i'm passionate about the
sciences
history is something i would do just
merely as a hobby but that's not to say
that i don't think the historians aren't
doing a job
as equally important as the scientists
let's say
and so too for every other area of human
knowledge not to say they're not filled
with misconceptions and i wouldn't think
that
historians sometimes are going down
terribly blind alleys and could be
biased and all that sort of stuff
the subject itself is as important as
chemistry as physics as medicine
okay all these things form a coherent
whole
and we need to understand that
explanations at the different levels
are required at those different levels
are absolutely appropriate those
different levels and
the only way we can make sense of things
at those levels
history is required because it's the
only way to understand
matters of history okay applying physics
to that is ridiculous
as we have just seen and applying
theoretical physics
to any other domain outside of
is going to be a fool's errand unless of
course it somehow subsumes those areas
as we have said before like computation
for example was brought into
physics into quantum physics and so now
maybe epistemology brought into that
area as well but only once it becomes a
good explanation
applying theoretical physics to
things like why winston churchill statue
is there
is silly okay so part two
done and dusted we are on to part three
next time and until then bye
[Music]
so
you